Stock Analysis for Steve

-Overview of the Project-

Steve is a coworker and is somewhat savvy in Excel, but he's asked to help him with his analysis using VBA and a set of given financial data for a list of stocks. Based on appropriate analysis using available historical information, I am tasked to measure performance of different stocks and seek potential opportunities for future investments in hopes to generate profit for Steve and his parents. 


-Results-

Initially, Steve's parents believed that if a stock is traded often, then the price will accurately reflect the value of the stock. Steve's parents are particularly interested in the performance of Daqo (Ticker:DQ). Therefore, in order to determine whether or not if this speculation is true or false, we conduct an analysis of a list of 12 stocks with the following information provided; Ticker, Date (of trade), Open Price, Price High, Price Low,Closing price, Adjusted Closing Price and Total Volume traded. The data is available for the year of 2017 and 2018. Next, we enable the macro in order to write a script to run timely and accurate analysis. We first enable the VBA setting within Excel, create a Module and start working "backwards". In order to conduct the research, we need to know the output - what information do we need to make the right call? In this case, Steve's parents are looking at trade volume and annual gross profit for the year based on trade volume and total return (using formula for =tickerEndingPrices(i) / tickerStartingPrices(i) - 1). So, we make create a list of tickers (12) by assigning range (Range"A1"), creating headers (Ex: Cells3,1).Value = Tickets), typing out 12 Individual tickers, initializing variables, creating loops (Ex: For i, Next i). Once the table was generated with a row of ticker, total volumes and return, we then focused on formatting the table to improve visualization of the information to allow Steve and his parents to easily understand the analysis.We first apply conditional formatting for the return metric, highlighting cells with profit return of >$0 in green and red for below $0. In order to accomplish this, we wrote If/Then statements, such as below (Reference the formula below for exact format: For i = dataRowStart To dataRowEnd                If Cells(i, 3) > 0 Then                        Cells(i, 3).Interior.Color = vbGreen                    Else                    Cells(i, 3).Interior.Color = vbRed                    End If
 Lastly, we added additional useful tools to not only format the table for better aesthetics (bolded, underlined, etc), creating a button to autogenerate results from one location, and even create a pop up message that shows the amount of time the macro took to run the script to generate the result!

One big observation made from the script written throughout the module vs, refactored script is that the refactored script runs much more efficiently and faster due to better organized, taking fewer steps, using less memory and improving the logic of the code to make it easier for future users to read. Refer to the images below for side by side comparison. (Hope the images work this time! If not individual pictures uploaded in GitHub).
/Users/ruihayashida/Desktop/Screen Shot 2020-12-20 at 3.59.22 PM.png
/Users/ruihayashida/Desktop/Screen Shot 2020-12-20 at 3.58.58 PM.png

In terms of overall results, Steve's parent's speculation seemed to be somewhat accurate. For the year of 2017, most frequently traded stock was SPWR US, with more than 780M trade volume and an overall 23% return. In 2018, ENPS US trade volume exceeded 600M and successfully gained 82% increase in their return. However if you take a closer look into the analysis, it clearly shows that trade volume does not guarantee positive performance. For example, for the year of 2018, SPWR US stood 2nd place in total volume traded, however incurred a 45% loss in return for the year. On the contrary, in 2018, stock with the lowest trading volume, DQ, outperformed with ~200% return. In conclusion, although Steve's methodology may be useful in analyzing basic trend of company's financial performance, with more data, advanced use of tools and skillsets, we will be able to conduct much more reliable research regarding performance of stocks.  


-Summary Statement-

As stated above, refactored codes have several advantages. It runs effectively and efficiently, uses less resources, organized, better reusability and (potentially) easily sustained, However refactored codes do come with some disadvantages as well. Unlike many subjects, there are many ways to write a script for an identical product and/or result. One person may have an idea in mind and write a code structured in a specific way but the 2nd, 3rd or even the 4th individual that works on the script may approach writing the 'same script' a completely different way. This is why sustainability of a refactored codes is a *potential* advantage because without proper communication, the script may end up becoming more complicated in the end. 
These pros and cons applied to refactoring the original VBA script for this challenge as well. Although the refactored code seemed useful at first, we quickly realized that a careful line-by-line review of the script was absolutely necessary to fully understand what was written. We then filled out the required spaces but with notes to help us keep track of what each line items were written for. Understanding the strengths as well as the weakness of VBA certainly helped me avoid problems throughout the module. 